PLANNER-2784 Write a blog post about dynamic scaling (#533)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: optaplanner-website-root/content/blog/2022/09/26/DynamicScalingOfOptaPlannerWorkloadOnOpenShift.adoc

= Run OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift, part II.
rsynek
2022-09-26
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: cloud, openshift, kubernetes, scaling

In the first https://www.optaplanner.org/blog/2022/06/09/RunOptaPlannerWorkloadOnOpenShift.html[article about running OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift],
I've shown how to use the OptaPlanner operator to solve multiple datasets of the same planning problem by starting several pods on OpenShift.

> Let's not pay the bills for machines sitting idle. Since the previous article, the OptaPlanner operator supports dynamic scaling driven by the number of input datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That implementation kept a number of nodes always around, even if they were idle. But why pay the bills for those? Since the previous article, the OptaPlanner operator supports dynamic scaling driven by the number of input datasets.
```

The https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/tree/development/technology/kubernetes[Kubernetes demo],
based on the https://www.optaplanner.org/learn/useCases/schoolTimetabling.html[school timetabling] use case,
has been updated to show the dynamic scaling.

== Architecture

> The architecture has changed, replacing some existing components and adding a new one, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture has evolved, replacing some existing components and adding a new one, too.
```

image::demoArchitecture.svg[OpenShift demo architecture diagram]

The OptaPlanner operator depends on two other operators: https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] operator, which creates ActiveMQ Artemis broker and queues,

> and https://keda.sh/[KEDA] for scaling the solver deployment, represented by the school-timetabling pods in the picture.

Reviewer: Let's make this a proper list, it will read better.

> The OptaPlanner operator depends on two other operators: https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] operator, which creates ActiveMQ Artemis broker and queues,
> and https://keda.sh/[KEDA] for scaling the solver deployment, represented by the school-timetabling pods in the picture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OptaPlanner operator depends on two other operators: https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] operator, which creates ActiveMQ Artemis broker and queues,
and https://keda.sh/[KEDA] for scaling the solver deployment, represented by the `school-timetabling` pods in the picture.
```

The Demo App generates datasets, stores them in the PostgreSQL database, and sends a message to the `school-timetabling-problem` queue per each dataset.

> The School Timetabling, which defines the optimization problem, reads a single message from the `school-timetabling-problem` queue, loads the dataset

Reviewer: "The School Timetabling" what?

from the database, and solves it. After that, it saves the solution back to the database and sends a message to the `school-timetabling-solution` queue to let the Demo App know that the solution is ready for taking.

=== ActiveMQ

The use case for messaging in this architecture is a shared job queue. ActiveMQ Artemis is a good fit here as it provides the exactly-once delivery.
If a solver pod dies, the ActiveMQ Artemis broker detects a broken connection and redelivers the message to any other available pod.

==== Batch delivery

> By default, the ActiveMQ Artemis distributes messages in batches to reduce needless network round trips.
> While this is a favorable behavior for masses of messages requiring relatively short processing time, our case is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the ActiveMQ Artemis distributes messages in batches to reduce needless network round trips.
While this is a favorable behavior for large amounts of messages requiring relatively short processing time, our case is different.
```

We expect fewer messages that, on the other hand, take a long time to process, as it involves optimizing a dataset by OptaPlanner.
Also, we have a different goal; instead of minimizing the latency, we aim to parallelize solving of multiple datasets as much as possible.
Each active solver pod must be solving one dataset at any moment.

Batch message delivery hinders scalability because if the first solver pod prefetches multiple messages, the other pods may sit idle.

> The message prefetch can be switched off by using the client-side JMS connection parameter `jms.prefetchPolicy.queuePrefetch=0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The message prefetch is switched off by using the client-side JMS connection parameter `jms.prefetchPolicy.queuePrefetch=0`.
```

See the `quarkus.qpid-jms.url` property in https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/blob/development/technology/kubernetes/school-timetabling/src/main/resources/application.properties[application.properties] of the School Timetabling.

==== Atomicity

Receiving the input problem message and sending the output message informing that solving has ended must happen in a transaction
to ensure atomicity.

> Only when the transaction is committed the ActiveMQ Artemis broker removes the input problem message from the queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only when the transaction is committed does the ActiveMQ Artemis broker remove the input problem message from the queue.
```

[NOTE]
.Use the right tool for the job.

====

> In the previous article, Kafka was distributing messages representing tasks for solvers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous article, Kafka was used to distribute messages representing tasks to solve.
```

> = Run OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift, part II.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Run OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift, part II
```

rsynek
2022-09-26
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: cloud, openshift, kubernetes, scaling

In the first https://www.optaplanner.org/blog/2022/06/09/RunOptaPlannerWorkloadOnOpenShift.html[article about running OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift],

> I've shown how to use the OptaPlanner operator to solve multiple datasets of the same planning problem by starting several pods on OpenShift.

Reviewer 2: dataset should be data set (two words). Search and replace.

> That implementation kept a number of nodes always around, even if they were idle. But why pay the bills for those? Since the previous article, the OptaPlanner operator supports dynamic scaling driven by the number of input datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That implementation required a number of nodes to be retained, even when they were idle. But why pay for unused nodes? Since the previous article, the OptaPlanner operator introduced support for dynamic scaling driven by the number of input datasets.
```

The https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/tree/development/technology/kubernetes[Kubernetes demo],
based on the https://www.optaplanner.org/learn/useCases/schoolTimetabling.html[school timetabling] use case,

> has been updated to show the dynamic scaling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has been updated to show dynamic scaling.
```

== Architecture

> The architecture has evolved, replacing some existing components and adding a new one, too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OptaPlanner architecture has evolved by replacing some existing components and adding a new component.
```

image::demoArchitecture.svg[OpenShift demo architecture diagram]

The OptaPlanner operator depends on two other operators:

> * https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] operator, which creates ActiveMQ Artemis broker and queues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] operator, which creates ActiveMQ Artemis broker and queues
```

> * https://keda.sh/[KEDA] for scaling the solver deployment, represented by the `school-timetabling` pods in the picture

Reviewer 2: Id like to make this parallel with the previous bullet. Does this make sense?
The https://keda.sh/[KEDA] operator for scaling

> The _Demo App_ generates datasets, stores them in the PostgreSQL database, and sends a message to the `school-timetabling-problem` queue per each dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _Demo App_ generates datasets, stores them in the PostgreSQL database, and sends a message to the `school-timetabling-problem` queue for each dataset.
```

The _School Timetabling_ project, which defines the optimization problem, reads a single message from the `school-timetabling-problem` queue, loads the dataset
from the database, and solves it. After that, it saves the solution back to the database and sends a message to the `school-timetabling-solution` queue to let the _Demo App_ know that the solution is ready for taking.

=== ActiveMQ

The use case for messaging in this architecture is a shared job queue. ActiveMQ Artemis is a good fit here as it provides the exactly-once delivery.

> If a solver pod dies, the ActiveMQ Artemis broker detects a broken connection and redelivers the message to any other available pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a solver pod becomes unresponsive, the ActiveMQ Artemis broker detects a broken connection and redelivers the message to any other available pod.
```

==== Batch delivery

By default, the ActiveMQ Artemis distributes messages in batches to reduce needless network round trips.
While this is a favorable behavior for large amounts of messages requiring relatively short processing time, our case is different.

> We expect fewer messages that, on the other hand, take a long time to process, as it involves optimizing a dataset by OptaPlanner.

Reviewer 2: I'm sorry, I am confused by this sentence. What is 'it'? As in 'it involves optimizing..."

Author: Good point, thanks.

Also, we have a different goal; instead of minimizing the latency, we aim to parallelize solving of multiple datasets as much as possible.
Each active solver pod must be solving one dataset at any moment.

> Batch message delivery hinders scalability because if the first solver pod prefetches multiple messages, the other pods may sit idle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Batch message delivery hinders scalability because if the first solver pod prefetches multiple messages, the other pods might remain idle.
```

The message prefetch is switched off by using the client-side JMS connection parameter `jms.prefetchPolicy.queuePrefetch=0`.
See the `quarkus.qpid-jms.url` property in https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/blob/development/technology/kubernetes/school-timetabling/src/main/resources/application.properties[application.properties] of the _School Timetabling_ project.

==== Atomicity

> Receiving the input problem message and sending the output message informing that solving has ended must happen in a transaction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A transaction must receive the input problem message and send the output message informing that solving has ended.
```

Reviewer 2: I might have changed the meaning so if I did please correct. I was trying to make the sentence more direct and less round about

Author: The "transaction" cannot be a subject here, but I will rearrange the sentence.

to ensure atomicity.
Only when the transaction is committed does the ActiveMQ Artemis broker remove the input problem message from the queue.

[NOTE]
.Use the right tool for the job.

====
In the previous article, Kafka was used to distribute messages representing tasks to solve.
However, Kafka is not a good fit for this scenario.

Every time a new pod is started or deleted as a result of scaling up or down, Kafka reacts by rebalancing
topic partitions among the current consumers. Any message that has not been acknowledged and committed in

> the topic partition before the rebalancing starts, is redelivered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the topic partition before the rebalancing starts is redelivered.
```

> Due to the long processing of every message, the risk of redelivery is high.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the long time processing of every message, the risk of redelivery is high.
```

That's certainly not the efficiency we strove for.
====

=== KEDA

KEDA is the cornerstone of the dynamic scaling feature.
The KEDA controller observes the input problem queue size, in this case, the `school-timetabling-problem`,

> via a REST API of the ActiveMQ Artemis broker and modifies the number of replicas of the `school-timetabling` deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
through a REST API of the ActiveMQ Artemis broker, and modifies the number of replicas of the `school-timetabling` deployment.
```

=== OptaPlanner operator

The OptaPlanner operator creates three kinds of Kubernetes resources: _Deployment_, _ActiveMQArtemisAddress_, and _ScaledObject_.

* The _Deployment_ is based on a user-defined container image.
* _ActiveMQArtemisAddress_ resources represent the ActiveMQ queues; it's a responsibility of the ArtemisCloud operator to react when these resources appear and create the corresponding queues within the broker.
* The _ScaledObject_ describes what and how KEDA should scale.

== Running the demo

To run the demo, clone the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts[OptaPlanner Quickstarts] and follow the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/blob/development/technology/kubernetes/README.adoc[README].

== Conclusion

> OptaPlanner operator now supports dynamic scaling of workloads in a shared queue by utilizing ArtemisCloud and KEDA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OptaPlanner operator now supports dynamic scaling of workloads in a shared queue by using ArtemisCloud and KEDA.
```
